---
title: 'Project Unicorn Learnings'
author: rmoran
date: '2019-08-30'
image: ./hero.jpg
tags:
  - Project Unicorn
---

After several months of working with developers and shipping software project on Project Unicorn - we've learned a few things when it comes to writing and building software with teams that form spontaneiously online. During this time, I’ve improved my software skills, picked up new technologies, practiced leading a small team of developers, and now have a clearer picture of what it takes to build and ship software with a small group of developers. Admittedly, it hasn't been easy so let me share some of the challenges we faced early on as a team. These are the same challenges many teams face early on when it comes to build software. The focus here less on technical challenges since those are less likely to derail a software team, but more on the challenges when it comes to momentum, planning, accountability, and seeking help.

- **Maintain the momentum** The feeling of positive momentum and excitement comes and goes. And when it initially goes, it kills most projects. The same way excitement is contagious when you start a new project so is discouragement. I’m not sure there is a single answer to this one except to start by working on something you are genuinely interested in. That interest will manifest itself into excitement when you sit down and work on your project. It will push you through the technical challenges, members leaving your team, or the little to no progress on some weeks. You can’t always control the level of your teammates excitement but you can control yours. Start there and let it be contagious.

- **Plan first. Code later.** When joining a project on a slack/discord team, planning is extremely important. We’ve seen members immediately begin coding and those projects have failed. Here’s how that plays out. They lone wolf it for the first 1-2 weeks then realize they don’t know what they are building. By that time their team has lost momentum. Avoid these urges by planning first. Agree with your teammates on a set of core features, decide on the language/tech you will use, what role will each member will take on, and move forward from there. Break down what features are key for version 1 and drop everything else. This may take 1-2 weeks to do, but trust that this will work out better for your team in the long run. There are a couple practical suggestions here when it comes to planning your features. Organize your project into [user stories](https://www.atlassian.com/agile/project-management/user-stories) and create a [product backlog](https://www.atlassian.com/agile/scrum/backlogs). You can try the [moscow method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MoSCoW_method) to prioritize your features. If you're building a brand new product, ideally you want to boil down your users stories into a feature-set that takes 2 months or less to build.

- **Keep each other accountable.** Unless 1 or more person on the project makes the effort to assign tasks, then nothing will get done. Progress will slowly stagnate. Eventually everyone loses steam and it’s over. So care enough to track your work. We tracked our work on a GitHub project board. And had weekly check-in calls at the end of the week to talk about what we worked on that week and what we will work on the upcoming week. Here’s an example of our [GitHub board](https://github.com/orgs/projectunic0rn/projects/3?fullscreen=true). For the calls we just hopped on a google hangout that lasted 30 minutes to an hour. I recapped our call on the slack group so everyone knew what they were responsible for that week. As developers sometimes we are afraid to be direct and tell others what they are responsible for. This is one of the pieces that separates an individual contributor from a technical leader. If no one else on your team is doing this take it as an opportunity and step in to drive your project. It can be intimidating at times especially when you operate under the misplaced notion that a lead developer should know more than the rest of the developers on the team. Drop that notion and step up to lead your project.

- **Ask for help.** We are all learning here and we all try to come into a project with the understanding that none of us are experts. Yes, some might be more experienced than others but no one truly knows it all. Find out the skill levels of your teammates, and ask for help when you need it. I write software professionally and I’ve worked in environments where the lead developer is defensive about what they know, and is not willing to admit what they don’t know. It doesn’t help anyone especially when we’re early in our careers and we are trying to learn. Be the first to admit what you don’t know and continue to do that. Eventually, everyone realizes that it’s okay to not know. Eventually, everyone starts to ask questions instead of holding them in out of fear of coming off inexperienced.

The projects that stagnate and fail do so for more than just one reason. Hopefully these points solve the early challenges you will face on your next team project.
